**Professor Toni Locy\
**201 Reid Hall\
locyt@wlu.edu\
Office hours: M/T/W/R 10 a.m.-Noon and Fridays 10 a.m.-4 p.m. (If I’m in
my office, I have office hours.)\
458-8434

**Professor Jeff Barry\
**Leyburn M38 (main level, back corner near the video editing suite)\
barryj@wlu.edu\
Office hours: M/W 1:30-2:30 p.m. (I’m usually at the library every
weekday. Feel free to contact me by email to arrange a meeting outside
of office hours.)

Class schedule
==============

M/W 2:45-4:15 p.m.

Course description
==================

Have you ever wondered how The New York Times and The Guardian put
together their Pulitzer Prize-winning interactive stories, Snow Fall:
The Avalanche at Tunnel Creek and NSA Files Decoded: What the
Revelations Mean to You? This course introduces students to digital
tools that will help them imagine, design and create powerful,
compelling interactive features with audio, video, graphics—and
words—that are on the cutting edge of journalism and mass
communications. Students will learn basic web design and programming
skills through HTML, CSS and JavaScript.

This course is designed for students with little or no coding experience
but who have a burning desire to learn, “How they did that,” so they no
longer are mystified by what’s behind the curtain on websites.

Course objectives
=================

Students also will learn key terminology and practices that will enable
them to envision, report and execute compelling online narratives
through the interplay of text, images, sound and video that optimizes
the reader experience. By the end of the term, students will appreciate
the power and potential of interactive storytelling, and the creative
possibilities of gathering and delivering the news in the 21^st^
century.

At a minimum, every student needs to know how the web and computers
work, but today’s journalism and strategic communications students need
to know more. This course will show them that they cannot settle for
acting solely as content creators. They also will learn the importance
of crafting stories and messages in the most ethical, compelling ways in
the digital world.

This course will dispel the notion that all things digital are “magic,”
leading many people to take for granted what they see or hear on the
Internet with a click or swipe of a finger. To do so, this course aims
to help students understand the building blocks of web design, including
HTML, CSS, databases and coding, not only to enable them to hold their
own in discussions with software developers and engineers. The
coursework also will inspire some of them to take the lead in
decision-making about designs that determine how their stories are told.

Modern journalists and strategic communicators need to understand the
technical side of web design to participate meaningfully in the work of
both startups and established media companies. This course will help
students identify their roles and responsibilities in working in a team
of innovative storytellers.

Above all else, this course seeks to alleviate, if not eliminate fear of
the unknown, or worse, fear of failure. Students will face the challenge
of solving problems, and learn to think on their feet under the pressure
of demanding deadlines in which milliseconds matter.

Structure of the course
=======================

The course is structured around developing the class project, which is a
journalistic multimedia story. Past class projects were:

-   From Country to Campus: Third-Year Housing Shifts W&L’s Storied
    Social Scene (Fall 2015) <http://fromcountrytocampus.com/>

-   A Hell of a Ride: I-81 Gives as Much as It takes (Winter 2017)
    <http://i81hell.com/>

The course is divided into two phases of six weeks each. The first six
weeks focuses on gathering content for your story and learning about
multimedia storytelling design. The second six weeks focuses on
designing and developing the website for the class project.

Each class during the first six weeks will be broken down into three
30-minute segments.

1.  Web site analysis

2.  Learning how the web works through a technical examination of that
    site

3.  Reporting

For the first class, we will analyze an assigned website together. For
other classes, you will be expected to have examined an assigned site
closely prior to class and to have read any and all assigned readings.
Before each class you must submit a discussion question by 9 a.m. to
Professors Locy and Barry via email.

Texts
=====

There is no required text to purchase for this course. We will be using
two online resources for learning web design:

-   Learn to Code HTML & CSS: Develop & Style Websites
    (<https://learn.shayhowe.com/>) is the online version of a book by
    Shay Howe. You can purchase the book if you want, but you are not
    required to do so.

-   Lynda.com videos on HTML, CSS, and Bootstrap are available to you
    via license purchased by the university. You must authenticate with
    your W&L username/password via this link:
    <https://go.wlu.edu/Lynda>.

For almost each class, you will be expected to have examined different
websites that will inform and inspire you in designing the ways you want
to tell the story of your final project. The links to the websites are
listed in the schedule at the end of the syllabus.

Goals and expectations
======================

The Accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass
Communications identifies several core values and competencies that
should be the focus of a journalism education. Several will be addressed
in this course, including the ability to:

-   Demonstrate an understanding of the diversity of groups in a global
    society in relationship to communications;

-   Understand concepts and apply theories in the use and presentation
    of images and information;

-   Work ethically in pursuit of truth, accuracy, fairness and
    diversity;

-   Think critically, creatively and independently;

-   Write correctly and clearly in forms and styles appropriate for the
    communications professions, audiences and purposes they serve;

-   Critically evaluate your own work and that of others for accuracy
    and fairness, clarity, appropriate style and
    grammatical correctness.

-   Apply current tools and technologies appropriate for the
    communications professions in which they work, and to understand the
    digital world.

Our goals and expectations also meet the standards set by the University
for a course to receive a designation under Digital Humanities by
providing students with the ability to:

-   Integrate digitally driven research goals, methods, and media with
    discipline-specific inquiry;

-   Understand, analyze, and use data;

-   Develop critical savvy for assessing sources and data;

-   Use design critically;

-   Assess information and information technologies critically;

-   Work collaboratively.

Class policies
==============

Attendance
----------

Your attendance is required at every class. If you must be absent, you
must let both of us know in advance by email, or call one of us. If your
absence is due to illness, you probably should go to Student Health
Services. We expect you to mute your cell phones during class, but, of
course, you can use them if we are working on a story.

Late Work
---------

A late assignment is no different than a missed deadline, and it will
receive 0 points.

Plagiarism
----------

You cannot pass someone else’s words, phrasing or ideas off as your own.
If you do, you will face referral to the Student Executive Committee.
Please see the EC’s definition of plagiarism and other resources on the
issue at <http://libguides.wlu.edu/plagiarism>*.* If you are confused
about attribution, please ask me.

Fabrication
-----------

For journalists there is no greater sin than making up a quote, a fact
or the existence of a source of information. If you do, you will face
referral to the Student Executive Committee.

Collaboration
-------------

This class will rely heavily on teamwork to prepare students for what
they might experience if they were to work for an online startup. You
will be expected to work together—and on your own—in support of the
group. Your grade will reflect your ability to work with others. You
must work on your own, though, if we ask you to do so.

Accommodations for students with special needs 
-----------------------------------------------

Washington and Lee University makes reasonable academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. All undergraduate
accommodations must be approved through the Title IX Coordinator and
Director of Disability Resources, Elrod Commons 212 (540) 458-4055.
Students requesting accommodations for this course should present an
official accommodation letter within the first two class days of the
term and schedule a meeting outside of class time to discuss
accommodations. It is the student’s responsibility to present this
paperwork in a timely fashion and to follow up about accommodation
arrangements. Accommodations for test-taking must be arranged with the
professor at least a week before the date of the test or exam, including
finals.

Grading
=======

You will be evaluated and graded based on professional standards. You
must be accurate, fair and skeptical in all of your work. The rules of
grammar, spelling, punctuation and journalistic style must be
followed—and honored. Factual errors are not acceptable.

Each assignment will be worth a specific number of points. It is
important to note that you **earn** points; we do not take them away.
That means everyone starts the course with 0 points. **But you could
lose hard-earned points if you miss class without contacting Professors
Locy and Barry beforehand: Unexcused absences will result in a loss of 5
points per missed class.**

At the end of the term, the points you’ve earned will be tallied and
your grade will be determined. The scale is traditional:

 A – 100 - 93.5

A- – 93.49 - 90

B+ – 89.99 - 87

B – 86.99 - 83

B- – 82.99 - 80

C+ – 79.99 - 77

C – 76.99 - 73

C- – 72.99 - 70

D+ – 69.99 - 67.5

D – 67.49 - 63

D- – 62.99 - 60

F – below 60

You must complete all of the assignments in the course. If you do not,
you will receive an F.

Class participation 100 points
------------------------------

You are expected to contribute to the discussion during class.

Discussion questions part of class participation grade
------------------------------------------------------

By 9 a.m. before specified class meetings, you will submit two (2)
questions based on the website that we will analyze in that class to
<locyt@wlu.edu> and <barryj@wlu.edu>. The questions should be thoughtful
and demonstrate familiarity with the site and any related required
reading. Your questions should avoid easy and obvious answers. Instead,
you should aim your questions to provoke discussion and even debate
among your classmates. Discussion questions are due on the days
indicated on the class schedule.

Reporting memos 100 points
--------------------------

For weeks three through seven of the term, each student will file a
report that details the progress made in his or her respective area of
reporting responsibility. The memos should focus on the information that
has been gathered, and the evolving strategies for thoroughly reporting
the project: Who was interviewed? What public records were consulted and
obtained? What did you learn? Where are you going next? Each report will
be worth 20 points. Email your repots to <locyt@wlu.edu> and
<barryj@wlu.edu>. The reports are due by noon on the following Fridays:
January 26, February 2, February 9, February 11, March 2.

Web site analysis 50 points 
----------------------------

Understanding the structure of the compositional elements in a
multimedia story is as important as knowing how to code the website for
the story. Each student will lead a class discussion on one of the
multimedia stories covered in class. A sign-up sheet will be distributed
in class on January 19.

HTML/CSS 200 points
-------------------

The second half of the term is devoted to learning HTML and CSS in the
context of the group project. There will be four (4) assignments
involving HTML and CSS that you must complete. The assignments will be
worth a total of 200 points.

Final Project 200 points per student
------------------------------------

The final project will be a web-based multimedia story on the topic of
race at W&L. You will be graded on reporting, writing, multimedia
composition, design and implementation of the site. **Part of your grade
will be based on a 750-word written reflection on your contribution to
the final project.**

Presentation of Final Project 50 points per student
---------------------------------------------------

At the end of Winter Term, the class—as a team—will present the final
project. Each student is expected to talk during the presentation about
her/his contribution to the project.

**\
**

Tentative course schedule
=========================

Week 1
------

### Monday | Jan. 8

#### Topics

-   Introductions

-   Overview of course and group project

-   Website analysis: **Future Cities**
    (<http://www.futurecities.nl/en>)

For the first class, we will analyze the website together. For other
classes, you will be expected to have examined the site closely prior to
class and to have read any related readings. Before each class you must
submit a discussion question by. to Professors Locy and Barry via email.

### Wednesday | Jan. 10

#### Topics

-   Website analysis: **Snow Fall**
    \[<http://www.nytimes.com/projects/2012/snow-fall/>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   How we made Snow Fall
    \[<https://source.opennews.org/articles/how-we-made-snow-fall/>\]

-   Far Beyond Snow Fall
    \[<https://craigmod.com/sputnik/far_beyond_snowfall/>\]

-   Chapter 7, Hernandez, Richard Koci, and Jeremy Rue. The Principles
    of Multimedia Journalism : Packaging Digital News, Taylor and
    Francis, 2015.
    <https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/wlu/detail.action?docID=3569698>.

-   Start viewing the online course at Lynda.com Web Development
    Foundations: Web Technologies. Complete this two-hour course by Jan.
    17.

Week 2: MLK holiday week. Class on Wednesday AND Friday
-------------------------------------------------------

### Wednesday | Jan. 17

#### Topics

-   Class will meet in the University Archives and Special Collections,
    Leyburn Library

##### Readings

-   View the video of Blaine Brownell (W&L ’65) reading from his book on
    W&L history 1930-2000. The link to the video is found at the bottom
    of the following page:
    <https://columns.wlu.edu/new-book-covers-70-years-of-the-wl-story/>

### Friday | Jan. 19

#### Topics

-   Website analysis: **Undercurrents**
    \[<http://undercurrent360.com/>\]

-   Website analysis: **NSA Files: Decoded**
    \[<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded>\]

-   Sign-up for web site analysis assignment

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   About the project: Undercurrent
    \[<https://awards.journalists.org/entries/undercurrent/>\]

-   Redefining multimedia journalism
    \[<https://medium.com/thoughts-on-journalism/re-defining-multimedia-journalism-1f4966df37bc>\]

Week 3
------

### Monday | Jan. 22

#### Topics

-   Website analysis: **A New Age of Walls**
    \[<https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/world/border-barriers/global-illegal-immigration-prevention/>\]

-   Web site analysis: **The Wall**
    \[<https://www.usatoday.com/border-wall/>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   About the project: A New Age of Walls
    \[<https://awards.journalists.org/entries/a-new-age-of-walls/>\]

### Wednesday | Jan. 24

#### Topics

-   Website analysis: **Firestorm**
    \[<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/may/26/firestorm-bushfire-dunalley-holmes-family>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   10 things we learned during the making of Firestorm
    \[[**https://www.theguardian.com/info/developer-blog/2013/jun/07/10-things-we-learned-making-firestorm**](https://www.theguardian.com/info/developer-blog/2013/jun/07/10-things-we-learned-making-firestorm)**\]**

##### Jan. 26: Reporting memo due by noon

Week 4
------

### Monday | Jan. 29

#### Topics

-   Website analysis: **Casualties of the Streets**
    \[<http://projects.statesman.com/news/homeless-deaths/>\]

-   Website analysis: **Doctors and Sex Abuse**
    \[<http://doctors.ajc.com/>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   About the project: Casualties of the Streets
    \[<https://awards.journalists.org/entries/casualties-of-the-streets/>\]

-   About the project: Doctors and Sex Abuse
    \[<https://awards.journalists.org/entries/doctors-sex-abuse-knight/>\]

### Wednesday | Jan. 31

#### Topics

-   NPR visual stories

-   Website analysis: **Borderland**
    \[<http://apps.npr.org/borderland/>\]

-   Website analysis: **Life After Death**
    \[<http://apps.npr.org/life-after-death/>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   The Evolution of NPR’s Picture Stories
    \[<https://source.opennews.org/articles/evolution-nprs-picture-stories/>\]

-   NPR Visuals Team \[<http://blog.apps.npr.org/>\]

##### Feb 2: Reporting memo due by noon

Week 5
------

### Monday | Feb. 5

#### Topic

-   Website analysis: **A Game of Shark and Minnow**
    \[<http://www.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2013/10/27/south-china-sea/>\]

-   Website analysis: **Stowaways and Crimes Aboard a Scofflaw Ship**
    \[<https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/19/world/stowaway-crime-scofflaw-ship.html>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

#### Readings

\[to be added\]

### Wednesday | Feb. 7

#### Topics

> Data journalism

-   Website analysis: **Why America’s Schools Have a Money Problem**
    \[<https://www.npr.org/2016/04/18/474256366/why-americas-schools-have-a-money-problem>\]

-   Website analysis: **Unfounded**, an investigation by The Globe and
    Mail on sexual assaults in Canada
    \[<https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/investigations/compare-unfounded-sex-assault-rates-across-canada/article33855643/>\]

\* Discussion questions are due by 9 a.m.

##### Readings

-   About the project: Unfounded
    \[<https://awards.journalists.org/entries/unfounded-investigative-data-journalism/>\]

-   A behind-the-scenes look at FiveThirtyEight’s data journalism
    workflow with R
    \[<https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/useR-international-R-User-conference/useR2016/FiveThirtyEights-data-journalism-workflow-with-R>\]
    22-minute video

##### Feb 9: Reporting memo due by noon

Week 6
------

### Monday | Feb. 12

#### Topics

This week shifts from websites that are journalistic to those that are
designed for public relations and strategic communication. We’ll also
look at the creative agencies, the digital production and design studios
that developed these sites.

-   How many slaves work for you? \[<http://slaveryfootprint.org/>\],
    developed by Unit9 \[<https://www.unit9.com/>\]

-   Dragone \[<http://dragone.com/en>\], developed by dogstudio
    \[<https://www.dogstudio.co/>\]

-   Into the Artic (Greenpeace)
    \[<http://www.hellomonday.net/archive/greenpeace/intothearctic/en/>\],
    developed by Hello Monday \[<http://hellomonday.com/>\]

A few creative agencies:

-   84.Paris \[<http://www.84paris.com/en/home>\]

-   Black Negative \[<http://blacknegative.com/>\]

-   Immersive Garden \[<https://www.immersive-g.com>\]

-   La Haute Société \[<https://www.lahautesociete.com/>\]

-   Bright Media \[<http://brightmedia.pl/>\]

##### Readings

-   Browse the winners of the Awwwards
    \[<https://www.awwwards.com/websites/>\]

### Wednesday | Feb. 14

#### Topics

-   Katherine Book will visit the class.

Katherine Boo is a staff writer at The New Yorker and a former reporter
and editor for The Washington Post. She learned to report at the
alternative weekly, Washington City Paper, after which she worked as a
writer and co-editor of The Washington Monthly magazine. Over the years,
her reporting from disadvantaged communities has been awarded a Pulitzer
Prize, a MacArthur “Genius” grant, and a National Magazine Award for
Feature Writing. \[source: <http://www.behindthebeautifulforevers.com/>
\]

##### Readings

\[to be added\]

##### Feb 16: Reporting memo due by noon

### Feb. 19 – 23 Washington Break

Week 7
------

### Monday | Feb. 26

#### Topics

-   The role of Content Management Systems (CMS) in digital publishing.

-   Arc Publishing (CMS developed by The Washington Post)
    \[<https://www.arcpublishing.com/>\]

-   ArchieML

-   WordPress

##### Readings

-   What is the Archie Markup Language? <http://archieml.org/>

### Wednesday | Feb. 28

#### Topics

-   TBD

##### Readings

-   TBD

##### \
March 2: Reporting memo due by noon

Week 8
------

### Monday | March 5

#### Topics

-   TBD

##### Readings

\[to be added\]

### Wednesday | March 7

#### Topics

-   Jeff Soyk, award winning multimedia storyteller, will visit
    the class. View some of the projects he has developed:
    <http://jeffsoyk.com/>

Jeff Soyk is an award-winning media artist with experience in creative
direction, UI & UX design, animation, HTML5/CSS3/JS, and film/video. His
credits include creative director and UI/UX designer on PBS
Frontline’s Inheritance (2016 News & Documentary EMMY winner and Peabody
Facebook Award winner) as well as art director, UI/UX designer and
architect on Hollow (2013 Peabody Award winner and News & Documentary
EMMY nominee). \[Source: <http://jeffsoyk.com/about>\]

Week 9
------

### Monday | March 12

#### Topics 

### Wednesday | March 14

#### Topics

Week 10
-------

### Monday | March 19

#### Topics 

### Wednesday | March 21

#### Topics

Week 11
-------

### Monday | March 26

#### Topics 

### Wednesday | March 27

#### Topics

Week 12: LAST WEEK OF CLASS
---------------------------

### Monday | April 2

#### Topics 

### Wednesday | April 4

#### Topics

Exam Week
---------

There is no final exam for this course. The final project is due during
exam week. As a class, we will decide on the ‘go live’ date for the
project and the presentation date.
